could this cenote be a gateway to a
whole new world if it is where does that
world lead every new cenote presents a
new opportunity so not these really
present us with the truest form of
exploration found today when we come up
to the side of a cenote we literally
have no idea what we're gonna find at
the bottom of it until we actually get
in and investigate and for me that's one
of the greatest thrills about what we do
cenotes aren't just simple pools their
caves flooded caves whose roofs have
collapsed but Sam and Steve have yet to
discover
to what extent cenotes are connected to
each other by flooded tunnels if there
is a network of tunnels down there how
far does it go
what they're doing is carefully charting
in an as-yet uncharted part of the
planet somewhere no other human being
has ever gone it's one of the riskiest
things an explorer can do
this type of diving isn't for everybody
and definitely you have to want to do it
in order to be involved in it the first
cave that I ever did actually I was
pretty nervous talk to an astronaut that
sat on top of a rocket full of fuel and
blast it off to the moon sure I bet they
were a little bit nervous but look what
we've gained through space exploration
all those people were willing to take a
risk to achieve an incredible goal
sometimes there's hardly enough room to
squeeze through getting stuck or
damaging vital equipment now would be
fatal
we're diving an extremely hostile
environment it's under water it's dark
and it's easy to get disoriented and
therefore it's easy to have panic
attacks there's two ways out of a panic
situation and therefore panic is not an
option for us you really have to take
three deep breaths calm yourself and
assure yourself that you're able to get
out of that situation
exploration is rarely without risks but
one of the biggest rewards is seeing
something that's never been seen before
what they've discovered down here is
just staggering
the Maya did have an underworld and it's
a strange and as beautiful a place as
any myth might describe
you